Various updates (notably accessibility API). (#174)
brevzin/cpp_proposals: 2996_reflection/reflection.md

Note that this last version has lower complexity: While the versions using an expansion statement use an expected O(N) number of comparisons to find the matching entry, a `std::map` achieves the same with O(log(N)) complexity (where N is the number of enumerator constants).

On Compiler Explorer: [EDG](https://godbolt.org/z/Y5va8MqzG), [Clang](https://godbolt.org/z/3doherKx8).

Many many variations of these functions are possible and beneficial depending on the needs of the client code.
For example:

>   - the "\<unnamed>" case could instead output a valid cast expression like "E(5)"

Reviewer: typo, stray slash?
```suggestion
- the "<unnamed>" case could instead output a valid cast expression like "E(5)"
```

Author: Remarkably _not_ a typo: This otherwise renders as `""` because it looks like an HTML tag.

Reviewer: Oh... snap.

Earlier revisions of this paper allowed for taking the reflection of any _cast-expression_ that could be evaluated as a constant expression, as we believed that a constant expression could be internally "represented" by just capturing the value to which it evaluated. However, the possibility of side effects from constant evaluation (introduced by this very paper) renders this approach infeasible: even a constant expression would have to be evaluated every time it's spliced. It was ultimately decided to defer all support for expression reflection, but we intend to introduce it through a future paper using the syntax `^(expr)`.

> This paper does, however, support reflections of _values_ and of _objects_ (including subobjects). One way to obtain such reflections is using the `std::meta::reflect_value` and `std::meta::reflect_object` metafunctions, which return reflections of the result of once evaluating their argument. The `std::meta::value_of` metafunction can also be used to obtain a reflection of the value stored by an entity (if the entity is usable in constant expressions). While it's possible to support direct reflection of expression results (e.g., `^fn()`), we aren't convinced that this syntax provided enough value to justify its introduction at this time.

Author: After abandoning expression-reflection, we were briefly going to keep `^fn()` (not `^(fn())`) to "reflect an expression result" - that last sentence was to explain why we opted not to do that.

I've made an attempt to rephrase (and better motivate) this whole section; let me know what you think.

  - any template
  - any namespace (including the global namespace) or namespace alias
  - any object that is a _permitted result of a constant expression_

>   - any value of _structural type_ that may be held by a permitted result of a constant expression

Author: Yeah, probably fine as-is for the design / non-wording section. Reverted this.

>   - any value of _structural type_ that may be held by a permitted result of a constant expression

Author: Agreed that the current definitions make this awkward to specify.

static_assert(^i != ^j);  // 'i' and 'j' are different entities.
static_assert(value_of(^i) == value_of(^j));  // Two equivalent values.
static_assert(^i == std::meta::reflect_object(i))  // A variable is indistinguishable
                                                   // from the object it designates.

> static_assert(^i != ^42);  // A reflection of an object is not the same as its value.

Author: Good catch, thanks.

If the returned reflection is of a value, the type of the reflected value shall not be an alias and shall be cv-unqualified unless it is of class type.

A few possible extensions for `reflect_invoke` have been discussed among the authors. Given the advent of constant evaluations with side-effects, it may be worth allowing `void`-returning functions, but this would require some representation of "a returned value of type `void`". Construction of runtime call expressions is another exciting possibility. Both extensions require more thought and implementation experience, and we are not proposing either at this time.

### `reflect_value`, `reflect_object`, `reflect_function` {#reflect-expression-results}

::: std
```c++
namespace std::meta {
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_value(T expr) -> info;
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_object(T& expr) -> info;
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_function(T& expr) -> info;
}
```
:::

These metafunctions produce a reflection of the _result_ of once evaluating the provided expression.

> If `T` is of reference type or if `T` is not of structural type, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` fails to be a constant expression. If `T` is of class type and if any subobject of the value computed by `expr` having reference or pointer type designates an entity that is not a permitted result of a constant expression, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` fails to be a constant expression. Otherwise, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` produces a reflection of the value computed by once evaluating an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion applied to `expr`. The type of the reflected value shall be `T` if `T` is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of `T`. The type of the reflected value shall not be an alias.

Author: I've moved the details here (and for the other two sister functions) into formal library wording.

> If `T` is of reference type or if `T` is not of structural type, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` fails to be a constant expression. If `T` is of class type and if any subobject of the value computed by `expr` having reference or pointer type designates an entity that is not a permitted result of a constant expression, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` fails to be a constant expression. Otherwise, `reflect_value<T>(expr)` produces a reflection of the value computed by once evaluating an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion applied to `expr`. The type of the reflected value shall be `T` if `T` is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of `T`. The type of the reflected value shall not be an alias.

Author: Mostly adopted your wording here.

> If `T` is of function type or if `expr` designates an entity that is not a permitted result of a constant expression, `reflect_object<T>(expr)` is not a constant expression. Otherwise, `reflect_object<T>(expr)` produces a reflection of the object whose identity is determined by once evaluating the lvalue `expr`. The type of the returned reflection is the type of the reflected object. If the evaluation of `expr` determines the identity of a variable `Obj`, the returned reflection shall compare equal to `^Obj`.

Author: Attempted to clean this up.

> If `T` is not of function type, `reflect_function<T>(expr)` is not a constant expression. Otherwise, `reflect_function<T>(expr)` returns a reflection of the function `Fn` whose identity is determined by once evaluating the lvalue `expr`; the returned reflection shall compare equal to `^Fn`.

Author: Attempted to clean this up.

```
:::

These metafunctions produce a reflection of the result of a call expression.

For the first overload: Letting `F` be the entity reflected by `target`, and `A@~0~@, A@~1~@, ..., A@~N~@` be the sequence of entities reflected by the values held by `args`: if the expression `F(A@~0~@, A@~1~@, ..., A@~N~@)` is a well-formed constant expression evaluating to a structural type that is not `void`, and if every value in `args` is a reflection of a value or object usable in constant expressions, then `reflect_invoke(target, args)` evaluates to a reflection of the result of `F(A@~0~@, A@~1~@, ..., A@~N~@)`. For all other invocations, `reflect_invoke(target, args)` is not a constant expression.

The second overload behaves the same as the first overload, except instead of evaluating `F(A@~0~@, A@~1~@, ..., A@~N~@)`, we require that `F` be a reflection of a template and evaluate `F<T@~0~@, T@~1~@, ..., T@~M~@>(A@~0~@, A@~1~@, ..., A@~N~@)`. This allows evaluating `reflect_invoke(^std::get, {std::meta::reflect_value(0)}, {e})` to evaluate to, approximately, `^std::get<0>([: e :])`.

> If the returned reflection is of a value, the type of the reflected value shall not be an alias and shall be cv-unqualified unless it is of class type.

Reviewer: This isn't a good use of "shall" - both because we're not in Core wording and the rule here is just what `reflect_invoke` _does_, rather than being a requirement on the program. It's just that when `reflect_invoke` gives you a reflection of the value, the type of that value isn't an alias type and, if the type is scalar, is cv-unqualified. 

Also what do you mean *if* it's a value? What else could it be?

Author: > This isn't a good use of "shall"

👍 , done. Used language similar to what's used for `reflect_value` below.

> Also what do you mean if it's a value? What else could it be?

Could be a reflection of an object (i.e., a consteval function that returns a reference).

```cpp
consteval int &second(std::pair<int, int> &p) {
    return p.second;
}

int main() {
    static std::pair<int, int> p;
    [:reflect_invoke(^second, {^p}):] = 42;

    return p.second;
}
```

(currently an implementation bug that causes this not to work, but it will work on godbolt tomorrow)

A few possible extensions for `reflect_invoke` have been discussed among the authors. Given the advent of constant evaluations with side-effects, it may be worth allowing `void`-returning functions, but this would require some representation of "a returned value of type `void`". Construction of runtime call expressions is another exciting possibility. Both extensions require more thought and implementation experience, and we are not proposing either at this time.

### `reflect_value`, `reflect_object`, `reflect_function` {#reflect-expression-results}

::: std
```c++
namespace std::meta {
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_value(T expr) -> info;
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_object(T& expr) -> info;
  template<typename T> consteval auto reflect_function(T& expr) -> info;
}
```
:::

These metafunctions produce a reflection of the _result_ from evaluating the provided expression. One of the most common use-cases for such reflections is to specify the template arguments with which to build a specialization using `std::meta::substitute`.

> `reflect_value(expr)` produces a reflection of the value computed by an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion on `expr`. The type of the reflected value is the cv-unqualified (de-aliased) type of `expr`. The result needs to be a permitted result of a constant expression, and `T` cannot be of reference type.

Reviewer: Perfect 👍

Author: Thanks for the help with this!

[9]{.pnum} To value-initialize an object of type T means: [...]
:::

### [dcl.fct]{.sref} Functions {-}

Add a bullet to paragraph 9 of [dcl.fct]{.sref} to allow for reflections of abominable function types:

::: std
[9]{.pnum} A function type with a _cv-qualifier-seq_ or a _ref-qualifier_ (including a type named by _typedef-name_ ([dcl.typedef], [temp.param])) shall appear only as:

>   ...
> 
>   --- the _type-id_ of a _template-argument_ for a _type-parameter_ ([temp.arg.type])[.]{.rm}[,]{.addu}
> 
> :::addu
>   --- the operand of a _reflect-expression_ ([expr.reflect]).
> :::

Reviewer: Need to number the bulleted list:

```suggestion
* [9.1]{.pnum} the function type for a non-static member function,
* [9.2]{.pnum} ...
* [9.5]{.pnum} the _type-id_ of a _template-argument_ for a _type-parameter_ ([temp.arg.type])[.]{.rm}[,]{.addu}
:::addu
* [9.6]{.pnum} the operand of a _reflect-expression_ ([expr.reflect]).
:::
```

## Library

### [meta.type.synop]{.sref} Header `<type_traits>` synopsis

Add a new primary type category type trait:

::: std

> :: addu

Author: Thanks for the catch.

**Header `<type_traits> synopsis**

...
```diff
    // [meta.unary.cat], primary type categories
    template<class T> struct is_void;
...
    template<class T> struct is_function;
+   template<class T> struct is_reflection;

    // [meta.unary.cat], primary type categories
    template<class T>
      constexpr bool is_void_v = is_void<T>::value;
...
    template<class T>
      constexpr bool is_reflection_v = is_function<T>::value;
+   template<class T>
+     constexpr bool is_reflection_v = is_function<T>::value;
```

### [meta.unary.cat]{.sref} Primary type categories

Add the `is_reflection` primary type category to the table in paragraph 3:

<table>
<tr style="text-align:center"><th>Template</th><th>Condition</th><th>Comments</th></tr>
<tr><td>
```cpp
template <class T>
struct is_void;
```
</td><td style="text-align:center; vertical-align: middle">`T` is `void`</td><td></td></tr>
<tr style="text-align:center"><td>...</td><td>...</td><td>...</td></tr>
<tr><td>
```cpp
template <class T>
struct is_reflection;
```

> </td><td style="text-align:center; vertical-align: middle">`T` is `std::meta::info`</td><td></td></tr>

Author: Done.

  // [meta.reflection.member.queries], reflection member queries
  template<class... Fs>
    consteval vector<info> members_of(info type, Fs... filters);
  template<class... Fs>
    consteval vector<info> bases_of(info type, Fs... filters);
  consteval vector<info> static_data_members_of(info type);
  consteval vector<info> nonstatic_data_members_of(info type);
  consteval vector<info> subobjects_of(info type);
  consteval vector<info> enumerators_of(info type_enum);

  // [meta.reflection.member.access], reflection member access queries
  consteval info access_context();

  struct access_pair {
    consteval access_pair(info target, info from = access_context());
  };

>   consteval auto is_accessible(access_pair p) -> bool;

Author: Right, thanks. Done.

  template <reflection_range R = span<info const>>
  consteval info substitute(info templ, R&& arguments);

  consteval bool test_trait(info templ, info type);

>   template <reflection_rane R = span<info const>>

Author: Good catch, done.

consteval bool is_noexcept(info r);
```

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: `true` if `r` designates a `noexcept` function or member function type, a pointer to `noexcept` function or member function type, a closure type of a non-generic lambda whose call operator is declared `noexcept`, a value of any of the previously mentioned types, or a function that is declared `noexcept`. Otherwise, `false`.

Author: Exactly - but now that you mention it, saying "function type" probably covers that case. I'll say:

> ... a `noexcept` function type, a pointer to `noexcept` function or member function type, ...

[#]{.pnum} *Effects*: If `dealias(r)` designates a class template specialization with a reachable definition, the specialization is instantiated.

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: `true` if the type designated by `dealias(r)` is an incomplete type ([basic.types]{.sref}). Otherwise, `false`.

Author: Done.

[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the type of that entity.  If every declaration of that entity was declared with the same type alias (but not a template parameter substituted by a type alias), the reflection returned is for that alias.  Otherwise, if some declaration of that entity was declared with an alias it is unspecified whether the reflection returned is for that alias or for the type underlying that alias. Otherwise, the reflection returned shall not be a type alias reflection.

```cpp
consteval info value_of(info r);
```

> [#]{.pnum} *Mandates*: `r` is a reflection designating either an object usable in constant expressions ([expr.const]{.sref}), an enumerator, or a value.

Author: Done.

[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: If `r` is a reflection designating an object, then a reflection of the value held by that object. Otherwise, if `r` is a reflection of an enumerator, then a reflection of the value of the enumerator. Otherwise, `r`.

> [#]{.pnum} *Remarks*: The reflected value shall have the type of the entity reflected by `r` if it is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of that type. The type of the reflected value shall not be an alias.

Author: Good to know, thanks. I've basically just concatenated the two sections under `Returns`, but let me know if it needs more work.

[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the type of that entity.  If every declaration of that entity was declared with the same type alias (but not a template parameter substituted by a type alias), the reflection returned is for that alias.  Otherwise, if some declaration of that entity was declared with an alias it is unspecified whether the reflection returned is for that alias or for the type underlying that alias. Otherwise, the reflection returned shall not be a type alias reflection.

```cpp
consteval info value_of(info r);
```

[#]{.pnum} *Mandates*: `r` is a reflection designating either an object usable in constant expressions ([expr.const]), an enumerator, or a value.

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: If `r` is a reflection designating an object, then a reflection of the value held by that object. Otherwise, if `r` is a reflection of an enumerator, then a reflection of the value of the enumerator. Otherwise, `r`. The reflected value shall have the type of the entity reflected by `r` if it is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of that type. The type of the reflected value shall not be an alias.

Reviewer: As noted above, maybe something like this:

```suggestion
[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: If `r` is a reflection designating an object `o`, then a reflection of the value held by that object. The reflected value has type `delias(type_of(o)`, with the cv-qualifiers removed if this is a scalar type. Otherwise, if `r` is a reflection of an enumerator, then a reflection of the value of the enumerator. Otherwise, `r`. ```

Author: Done.

:::
:::

### [meta.reflection.result] Expression result reflection {-}

::: std
::: addu
```cpp
template <typename T>
  consteval info reflect_value(T expr);
```

[#]{.pnum} *Mandates*: `T` is a structural type. `T` is not a reference type. Any subobject of the value computed by `expr` having reference or pointer type designates an entity that is a permitted result of a constant expression.

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the value computed by an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion applied to `expr`. The type of the reflected value shall be `T` if `T` is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of `T`. The type of the reflected value shall not be an alias.

Reviewer: As above. Also I don't think we need to say that `T` isn't an alias since it already cannot be. 
```suggestion
[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the value computed by an lvalue-to-rvalue conversion applied to `expr`. The type of the reflected value is `T` if `T` is of class type, and otherwise the cv-unqualified version of `T`.
```
Also, do we really need this to ever give a const value? Like is somebody actually going to write `reflect_value<T const>(something)`? Can we just make it always return cv-unqualified `T`?

Author: Ah, great catch! We talked through this a little while ago, and concluded that it will never be `T const`, even if you write that. Fixed, thanks.

```cpp
template <typename T>
  consteval info reflect_object(T& expr);
```

[#]{.pnum} *Mandates*: `T` is not a function type. `expr` designates an entity that is a permitted result of a constant expression.

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the object whose identity is determined by the lvalue `expr`. If the reflected object is a variable `Obj`, the returned reflection shall compare equal to `^Obj`.

Reviewer: As above with "shall":
```suggestion
[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: `^o`, where `o` is the object that `expr` references. 
```
But I think this is kind of a problem since you cannot write `^o` for some of those objects?

Author: I removed "shall", but you're right - I deliberately skirt that by referring to "the object whose identity is determined by the lvalue `expr`". Aside from the "shall", I the existing language is more exact.

Author: That said, I simplified the wording to be closer to what you suggested for `reflect_function`.

```cpp
template <typename T>
  consteval info reflect_function(T& expr);
```

[#]{.pnum} *Mandates*: `T` is a function type.

> [#]{.pnum} *Returns*: A reflection of the function `Fn` whose identity is determined by the lvalue `expr`. The returned reflection shall compare equal to `^Fn`.

Reviewer: Likewise:
```suggestion
[#]{.pnum} *Returns*: `^fn`, where `fn` is the function referenced by `expr`. 
```

Author: Done.
